Release notes for v23.1.14 (#18222)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v23.1/v23.1.14.md

## v23.1.14

Release Date: January 17, 2024

{% include releases/release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

<h3 id="v23-1-14-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

> - CockroachDB now supports [`IMPORT INTO`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/import-into) a table that has columns typed as arrays of user-defined types (such as enums). Tables that use multiple user-defined types with the same name but different schemas are still unsupported. [#116361][#116361]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CockroachDB now supports [importing into](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/import-into) a table that has columns typed as arrays of user-defined types (such as enums). Tables that use multiple user-defined types with the same name but different schemas are still unsupported. [#116361][#116361]
```
A little more readable.

> - Added a new field, `StmtPosInTxn`, to the `CommonSQLExecDetails` (included in SQL audit logs, SQL execution logs, and telemetry events) to represent the statement's index in the transaction, starting at 1. [#116558][#116558]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added a new field, `StmtPosInTxn`, to the `CommonSQLExecDetails` (included in SQL audit logs, SQL execution logs, and telemetry events) to represent the statement's index (position) in the transaction. The first statement's `StmtPosInTxn` is `1`. [#116558][#116558]
```

<h3 id="v23-1-14-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

> - Updated the [`changefeed.lagging_ranges_threshold`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/cluster-settings#settings) and [`changefeed.lagging_ranges_polling_interval`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/cluster-settings#settings) cluster settings. [#115803][#115803]

Reviewer: Updated them how?

Author: Done

<h3 id="v23-1-14-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

- The [**Cluster Overview** page](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/ui-cluster-overview-page) now correctly renders the background color for email signups, fixing an issue where it was difficult to read the text. [#114546][#114546]

> - Resolved inconsistency in TimeScale component's **Now** button behavior, ensuring accurate chart updates even after custom time range selection. [#115513][#115513]

Author: Done

- Fixed error handling for `GetFiles` so that it does not cause a nil pointer dereference. [#114829][#114829]
- Fixed a bug that prevented the **SQL Activity** page from showing internal statements when the `sql.stats.response.show_internal.enabled` [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/cluster-settings) was set to `true`. [#114819][#114819]
- Rolled back deletes no longer cause a discrepancy between computed stats and the actual stored values. [#113772][#113772]
- Previously, CockroachDB could encounter an internal error when using the text format (as opposed to binary) when preparing statements with user-defined composite types. The bug was introduced in 23.1 and is now fixed. [#115063][#115063]
- Fixed a bug that could cause cluster version finalization to contend with descriptor lease renewals on large clusters. Descriptor lease renewals previously had a higher priority than cluster upgrade finalization. Finalization now always has a higher priority than descriptor lease renewal. [#114672][#114672]

> - Fixed a bug that would cause a [prepared statement](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/sql-grammar#prepare_stmt) to fail if it references an enum as well as a table that has undergone a schema change. [#115174][#115174]

Author: Done

> - [Backups](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/backup) now evenly distribute their work across all replicas, including followers, regardless of leaseholder placement. [#115018][#115018]

Reviewer: Does this apply to locality-aware backups too? cc/ @kathancox

Author: Checked with David T. -- he says the note is correct as is.

> - Replica processing in store queues has been enhanced to smoothly handle replicas that have undergone ID changes or destruction. These replicas can now be effectively re-added and processed without encountering previous purgatory-related issues. [#115036][#115036]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that could cause replica processing in store queues to get stuck if a the replica's ID has changed. [#115036][#115036]
```

> - Fixed an issue that could lead to stuck queries or inaccurate results when using lookup [joins](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/joins) involving equality columns and multiple ranges. The bug was introduced in 22.2 and is now fixed. [#115581][#115581]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed an bug introduced in v22.2 that could lead to stuck queries or inaccurate results when using lookup [joins](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/joins) involving equality columns and multiple ranges. [#115581][#115581]
```

> - [`CREATE INDEX`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/create-index) with expressions no longer fail on materialized [views](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/views) when the declarative schema changer is used. [#115596][#115596]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug in the declarative schema changer that could cause [`CREATE INDEX`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/create-index) with expressions to fail on materialized [views](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/views). [#115596][#115596]
```

> - Fixed a bug that could result in an incorrect "too few columns" error for queries that use `ANY <array>` syntax with a subquery. [#115591][#115591]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that could cause an inaccorate "too few columns" error for a query that used `ANY {array}` syntax with a subquery. [#115591][#115591]
```

> - Fixed a bug that could cause "too few/many columns" errors for queries that used `IN` or `NOT IN` with a non-trivial right operand, such as a subquery (rather than a constant tuple). [#115591][#115591]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that could cause  a "too few/many columns" errors for a query that used an `IN` or `NOT IN` clause with a non-trivial right operand, such as a subquery (rather than a constant tuple). [#115591][#115591]
```

> - Fixed a bug that could cause errors or inaccurate results when performing lookup and index [joins](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/joins) on tables with three or more column families. The bug was introduced in 22.2 and is now fixed. [#115899][#115899]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in v22.2 that could cause errors or inaccurate results when performing a lookup or index [join](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/joins) on a table with three or more column families. [#115899][#115899]
```

> - Fixed a bug that could cause internal errors or panics while attempting to forecast statistics on a numeric column. [#115899][#115899]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that could cause an internal error or a panic while attempting to forecast statistics on a numeric column. [#115899][#115899]
```

> - [`BEGIN`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/begin-transaction) statement logs now have correct query `Age` fields. Previously, these fields were being recorded incorrectly, which would lead to some statements also appearing erroneously in the slow query logs. [#115257][#115257]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug when issuing a [`BEGIN`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/begin-transaction) statement where incorrect `Age` field could be logged in the statement log. This bug could also cause statements to incorrectly appear in the slow query log. [#115257][#115257]
```

> - SQL stats in the UI now correctly reflect total runtime, resolving a calculation error that previously led to values exceeding 100%. [#117497][#117497]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug in the SQL Statistics UI where the runtime was incorrectly calculated. This bug could cause recorded values to appear to exceed 100%. [#117497][#117497]
```

> - Custom key column now functions with [change data capture queries](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/cdc-queries) correctly. For example, `CREATE CHANGEFEED WITH key_column=..., unordered AS SELECT * FROM table` now works correctly instead of retrying forever. Note that some functionalities with CDC custom keys are not fully supported, see 115267 for more details. [#117555][#117555]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that could cause a `CREATE CHANGEFEED WITH {key_column}` statement to retry forever. [#117555][#117555]
```

<h3 id="v23-1-14-performance-improvements">Performance improvements</h3>

> - Reduced query planning time significantly for some queries which join multiple tables. [#114512][#114512][#116107][#116107]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reduced query planning time significantly for some queries that join multiple tables. [#114512][#114512][#116107][#116107]
```

<div class="release-note-contributors" markdown="1">

<h3 id="v23-1-14-contributors">Contributors</h3>

This release includes 128 merged PRs by 42 authors.

> We would like to thank the following contributors from the CockroachDB community:
> 
> - Matthew Sanabria (first-time contributor)
> - rharding6373

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Both are CRL employees. (I verify by looking for the last name in Slack, typically)
